now this with the same way 

"CHAPTER ONE
The Way the World Works Is Broken
Jeff Johnson was pretty sure it wasn’t going to be a good day. On March 3, 2010, the
Federal Bureau of Investigation killed its biggest and most ambitious modernization
project—the one that was supposed to prevent another 9/11 but that had devolved into
one of the biggest software debacles of all time. For more than a decade the FBI had
been trying to update its computer system, and it looked as if they would fail. Again.
And now it was his baby.
He’d shown up at the FBI seven months earlier, lured there by the new Chief
Information Officer, Chad Fulgham, whom he’d worked with at Lehman Brothers. Jeff
was Assistant Director of the IT Engineering Division. He had an office on the top
floor of the J. Edgar Hoover Building in downtown Washington, D.C. It was a big
office. It even had a view of the Washington Monument. Little did Jeff know he’d end
up in a windowless cinder-block office in the basement for much of the next two
years, trying to fix something that everyone believed to be unfixable.
“It was not an easy decision,” Jeff says. He and his boss had decided to declare
defeat and kill a program that had already taken nearly a decade and cost hundreds of
millions of dollars. By that point, it made more sense to bring the project in-house and
do it themselves. “But it needed to be done and done well.”
The project was the long-awaited computer system that would bring the FBI into
the modern age. In 2010—the era of Facebook, Twitter, Amazon, and Google—the
FBI was still filing most of its reports on paper. The system the Bureau used was
called the Automated Case Support system. It ran on gigantic mainframe computers
that had been state of the art sometime in the eighties. Many special agents didn’t even
use it. It was just too cumbersome and too slow in an era of terror attacks and swiftmoving criminals.
When an FBI agent wanted to do something—anything, really—from paying an
informant to pursuing a terrorist to filing a report on a bank robber, the process wasn’t
that different from what it had been thirty years earlier. Johnson describes it this way:
“You would write up a document in a word processor and print out three copies. One
would be sent up the approval chain. One would be stored locally in case that one got
lost. And with the third you’d take a red pen—I’m not kidding, a red pen—and circle
the key words for input into the database. You’d index your own report.”
When a request was approved, that paper copy would drift down from upstairs
with a number on it. A number written on a piece of paper is how the FBI kept track of
all its case files. This method was so antiquated and porous that it was blamed in part
for the Bureau’s failure to “connect the dots” that showed various Al Qaeda activists
entering the country in the weeks and months before 9/11. One office was suspicious
of one person. Another wondered why so many suspicious foreigners were getting
flight training. Another had someone on a watch list but never told anyone else. No
one in the Bureau ever put it all together.
The 9/11 Commission drilled down after the attack and tried to discover the core
reason it was allowed to happen. Analysts, said the Commission, couldn’t get access
to the very information they were supposed to analyze. “The poor state of the FBI’s
information systems,” reads the report, “meant that such access depended in large part
on an analyst’s personal relationships with individuals in the operational units or
squads where the information resided.”
Before 9/11, the FBI had never completed an assessment of the overall terrorism
threat to the United States. There were a lot of reasons for this, from focus on career
advancement to a lack of information sharing. But the report singled out lack of
technological sophistication as perhaps the key reason the Bureau failed so
dramatically in the days leading up to 9/11. “The FBI’s information systems were
woefully inadequate,” the Commission’s report concludes. “The FBI lacked the ability
to know what it knew: there was no effective mechanism for capturing or sharing its
institutional knowledge.”
When senators started asking the Bureau some uncomfortable questions, the FBI
basically said, “Don’t worry, we have a modernization plan already in the works.”
The plan was called the Virtual Case File (VCF) system, and it was supposed to
change everything. Not letting any crisis go to waste, officials said they only needed
another $70 million on top of the $100 million already budgeted for the plan. If you go
back and read press reports on VCF at the time, you’ll notice that the words
revolutionary and transformation are used liberally.
Three years later, the program was killed. It didn’t work. Not even a little bit.
The FBI had spent $170 million in taxpayer money to buy a computer system that
would never be used—not a single line of code, or application, or mouse click. The
whole thing was an unmitigated disaster. And this wasn’t simply IBM or Microsoft
making a mistake. People’s lives were, quite literally, on the line. As Senator Patrick
Leahy of Vermont, then the ranking Democrat on the Senate Judiciary Committee, told
the Washington Post at the time:
We had information that could have stopped 9/11. It was sitting there and was not
acted upon.… I haven’t seen them correct the problems.… We might be in the
22nd century before we get the 21st-century technology.
1
It is rather telling that many of the people who were at the FBI when the Virtual
Case File disaster happened aren’t there anymore.
In 2005 the FBI announced a new program, Sentinel. This time it would work.
This time they’d put in the right safeguards, the right budget procedures, the right
controls. They’d learned their lesson. The price tag? A mere $451 million. And it
would be fully operational by 2009.
What could possibly go wrong? In March of 2010 the answer landed on Jeff
Johnson’s desk. Lockheed Martin, the contractor hired to make the Sentinel system,
had already spent $405 million. They’d developed only half of the project, and it was
already a year late. An independent analysis estimated it would take another six to
eight years to finish the project, and the taxpayers would have to throw in at least
another $350 million.
Finding some way around that was Johnson’s problem.
What went wrong and how the situation got fixed are why I’m writing this book.
It wasn’t that these weren’t smart people. It wasn’t that the Bureau didn’t have the
right personnel in place, or even the right technology. It wasn’t about a work ethic or
the right supply of competitive juices.
It was because of the way people were working. The way most people work. The
way we all think work has to be done, because that’s the way we were taught to do it.
When you hear what happened, it sounds at first as if it makes sense: the people
at Lockheed sat down before they bid on the contract, looked at the requirements, and
started planning how to build a system that would do all that. They had lots of
intelligent people working for months, figuring out what needed to be done. Then they
spent more months planning how to do it. They produced beautiful charts with
everything that needed to be accomplished and the time it would take to complete each
and every task. Then, with careful color selection, they showed each piece of the
project cascading down to the next like a waterfall.
These charts are called Gantt charts, after Henry Gantt, who developed them.
With the advent of personal computers in the 1980s making it easy to create these
intricate charts—and to make them really complex—they have become works of art.
Every single step in a project is laid out in detail. Every milestone. Every delivery
date. These charts truly are impressive to behold. The only problem with them is that
they are always, always wrong.
Henry Gantt invented his famous charts around 1910. They were first used in
World War I by General William Crozier, who was the Chief of Ordnance for the US
Army. Anyone who has studied that war knows that efficient organizational capability
was not exactly a salient feature. Why a World War I artifact has become the de facto
tool used in twenty-first-century project management has never been quite clear to me.
We gave up on trench warfare, but somehow the ideas that organized it are still
popular.
It’s just so tempting: all the work needed to be done on a massive project laid out
for everyone to see. I’ve visited many companies that have people whose only job is
to update that Gantt chart every day. The trouble is, once that beautifully elegant plan
meets reality, it falls apart. But instead of scrapping the plan, or the way they think
about the plan, managers instead hire people to make it look as if the plan is working.
Essentially, they’re paying people to lie to them.
This unfortunate pattern echoes those reports the Soviet politburo was getting in
the 1980s just before the total collapse of the USSR. A complete mirage. Now as then,
the reports become more important than the reality they’re supposed to describe, and if
there’s a discrepancy, reality is the problem, not the charts.
When I was a West Point cadet, I slept in Dwight Eisenhower’s old room. At
night, the streetlights would reflect off a gold plate on the mantelpiece and sometimes
wake me up. dwight d. eisenhower slept here, the plate read. And I’d remember that
Eisenhower once observed that planning for combat is important, but as soon as the
first shot is fired, your plans go up in smoke. At least he had enough sense not to use a
Gantt chart.
So Lockheed presented the FBI with all these lovely charts, and the Bureau
signed on. Supposedly, the task was now so well planned out that nothing could go
wrong. “Look, it’s in the color-coded, time-stamped, bar-graphed plan.”
Yet when Jeff and his boss, CIO Chief Chad Fulgham, looked at the plan in the
spring of 2010, they knew it for what it was, what such charts all are, really: a
complete fabrication. When the two men started to look at actual development and
actual deliverables, they realized the problem was beyond fixing. New defects in the
software were being discovered faster than old ones were being fixed.
Chad told the Department of Justice Inspector General that they could complete
the Sentinel project by bringing development in-house, cutting the number of
developers, and that, by doing so, they’d deliver the most challenging half of the
project in less than a fifth of the time with less than a tenth of the amount budgeted. The
skepticism in the usually dry IG reports to Congress is palpable. In the October 2010
report, after laying out their nine points of concern with the proposal, the IG
watchdogs conclude: “In sum, we have significant concerns and questions about the
ability of this new approach to complete the Sentinel project within budget, in a timely
fashion, and with similar functionality.…”
2"